# Disjoint Sets


## Introduction
2 sets are disjoint sets if they have no elements in common

Disjoint Sets (or Union-Find) have 2 operations:
- connect(x,y): connect x and y
- isConnect(x,y): checks if x and y are connected
```java
public interface DisjointSets {
    public void connect(int x, int y);
    public boolean isConnected(int x, int y);
}
```

### Connected Components
When combining sets of items, all items of that set will be connected\
If we combine all items into their own sets, and when calling connect() operation, this will take O(N) time\
to add all items from 1 set to another


## Quick Find
If we have an initial design of list of sets, where sets = connected components, then connect() operation will take O(N) time b/c have to loop until you find the set\
Instead, use id array for fast access of Find() operation\
If you have an array with indexes = id, this makes O(1) find operation

Now Find() operation will look like this:
```java
isConnected(x,y) {
    return id[x] == id[y]
}
```

## Quick Union
We established earlier that `connect()` operation takes O(N) time. How do we make this faster?\
What if we just changed 1 value? The id array's parent number. Every node will be assigned a parent\
Tree like structure for disjoint sets.\
Time complexities: What if you got long tree? `Find()` operation to find root of a node will take O(N) worst case time\
`Connect()` will also take O(N) worst case time

```java
public class QuickUnionDS implements DisjointSets {
    private int[] parentIds;

    public QuickUnionDS(int size) {
        parentIds = new int[size];
        for (int i = 0; i < size; i++) {
            parentIds[i] = -1; // default, set every node to point to dummy node
        }
    }

    private int find(int x) {
        while (parentIds[x] >= 0) {
            x = parentIds[x];
        }
        return x
    }

    @Override
    public void connect(int x, int y) {
        int i = find(x);
        int j = find(y);
        parentIds[i] = j;
    }

    @Override
    public boolean isConnected(int x, int y) {
        return find(x) == find(y);
    }
}
```

## Weighted Quick Union (Combing root of smaller tree to larger one)
Improving on Quick Union: whenever we call `find`, we have to climb to the root of the tree. Thus, shorter tree = faster it takes!\
New Rule: whenever we call `connect`, we always link the root of the smaller tree to the larger tree

example: `connect(x, y)`. If y tree is smaller, first find the root of y (y could be a random node in the tree), and connect that root with root of x tree

With weighted quick union: O(log N) `connect` operation and O(log N) `find operation`

## Weighted Quick Union w/ Path Compression for best O
Using path compression for `find()` (whenever we call find() operation, we traverse from path of the node to the root. Along the way, we can connect all the items we visited at their root at no extra aymptotic cost) Calling `connect(x,y)` and `isConnected(x,y)` methods call `find()` so, all elements will point directly to their root.

Thus, average runtime of `connect` and `isConnected` will become *almost constant*, aka. **amortized runtime**
