# ADTs, Sets, Maps, BSTs

## ADT (Abstract Data Types)
Defined only by its operations, not by its implementation. It's the abstract methods that define the data structure, not the exact implementation details.

For example: MyLL, CS61B's LinkedListDeque, etc.

Common ADTs: Stacks, lists, sets, maps

## BST (Binary Search Tree)
Linked Lists are great but it takes O(N) time to search for an item, this is slow. Binary Search Tree is similar to linked list but allows for O(log n) search via binary search

A tree consists of:
- Set of nodes
- Set of edges that connect those nodes
    - Constraint. There is exactly 1 path between any 2 nodes

Definitions:
- Root
- Child
- Parent
- Leaf - node with node child nodes is a leaf

Binary Search Tree Property:
- Every key in left subtree is less than X
- Every key in right subtree is greater than X

## Binary Search Tree Operations

### Search
Using binary search, since BST is already structured in sorted order
```java
BST find(BST tree, Key key) {
    if (tree == null) return null;
    if (key.equals(tree.key)) return tree;
    else if (key < tree.key) return find(tree.left, key);
    else return find(tree.right, key);
}
```

### Insert
Always insert at leaf node. Loop until you find the right location as a leaf node, create a new node of the key and attach to the tree
```java
BST insert(BST tree, Key key) {
    if (tree == null) return new BST(key);
    if (key < tree.key) tree.left = find(tree.left, key);
    else tree.right = find(tree.right, key);
    return tree;
}
```

### Delete
Delete from binary tree is more complicated because we need to rebalance the tree to maintain BST property\
We need to break it down to 3 conditions:

No children: It is a leaf, we can just delete its parent pointer and node will be garbage collected

One child: If node only has 1 child, we can just reassign parent's child pointer to the node's child and the node will be garbaged collected

Two children: if node has 2 children, we can't just reassign the pointers. We need to choose a node in the tree to replace the deleted one.
- This node needs to be > than everything in left subtree and < than everything in right subtree
This is either the right most node in left subtree or left most node in right subtree

## Conclusion:
We can use BST to implement `set` ADT! This is better than ArraySet which has O(N) worst case runtime for `contains` b/c need to search whole array to find it. BST will enable O(log(n)) runtime via binary search