# B-Trees

## Binary Tree Height
What is height for binary search tree? How about for tree that looks like a linked list\
O(Log n) for full tree, O(n) for the second tree

Worst case height: O(N)
Best case: O(Log N)

## Tree Defintions:
- depth: number of edges between node and root
- height: lowest depth of the tree
- average depth: sum of depths / num of nodes

## B Tree
Problem: Need to avoid imbalance trees when adding nodes\
What if we just add to the leaf nodes? And overstuff that node which becomes a list of nodes\
Like this:

```
      n1
   n2   n3
 n4    (n5, n6, n7, n8)
```

Height is balanced but don't want the leaf node to become too big of a list, so set limit L on number of items allowed in 1 node location\
When a list is over the limit, split it such that you pass a child node to parent node\
This creates a problem such that it is no longer a BST. Invalid BST, so split the child list again into 2 diff nodes such that BST property is still valid. 

```
if L = 3
      n1
   n2   (n3, n7)
 n4   (n5) (n6) (n8)
```

Summary:\
Create a B-tree such that insertions will be inserted into leaf nodes and converted to a list of nodes. When that list exceeds a limit set by you (don't want to overstuff the leaf nodes, list with so many nodes can lead to O(N) search time, like looking thru an array), split them in middle such that parent nodes accept child nodes and split the children such that BST property is still maintained 


## Insertion Process:
1. Always insert into leaf node
2. After inserting new node, check for limit. If limit exceeded, pop up middle left node to parent, and re-arrange the children nodes
3. If parent node exceeds limit, do step 2
4. Repeat this process until the parent node is good or you're at root


## B-Tree invariants
Order matters when inserting into a BST, it could be O(N) worst case or O(LogN) best case for insertion. Is this the case for B-Trees?

With a tree w/ nodes of numbers 1-7\
What B-tree can you make such that height = 1?

```
     (3,5)
(1,2) (4) (6,7)
```

With B-Trees, order of insertion might change the height of the B-Tree, but no matter what insertion order, tree will be bushy (instead of stringy like a linked list). Why? See the invariants

### 2 invariants:
- All leaves must be same distance from source
- A non-leaf node w/ k items must have exactly k+1 children:
Example: A tree like:\
```
       4
   2,3   5,6,7
   1
```

Note, this is impossible b/c leaf node should all be same distance from root. This is impossible bcause when inserting at leaf node, you propogate the node upwards. The non-leaf node (2,3) has 2 items in it but 1 child, this will never be the case cause it will be a node of 3 items after insertion


## B-Tree Runtime Analysis, Summary
In summary, use a B-tree when you want to guaranteed a bushy tree (instead of stringy like a linked list), this is due to the invariants above when inserting nodes.

### What is height of B-tree with limit L:
L = max num of items per node\
Height = Between Log_L+1(N) and Log_2(N)\
- Largest possible height is all non-leaf nodes have 1 item
- Smallest possible height is all nodes have L items
- Overall height is Theta(N)

### What about B-Tree operations?
Runtime for `contains`:
- Worst case number of nodes to inspect: H+1
- Worst case number of items to inspect: L
- Worst case number of split operations: H+1
- Overall runtime: O(HL), since H is O(Log N), this becomes O(L log N), since L is constant, this is O(log N)

Same for `add` operation

### Summary:
BSTs have best case height O(log N) and worst case height O(N)\
To avoid worst case height, you need a balanced tree (bushy and not stringy)\
B-Trees are a modification of BSTs that avoid the worst case O(N) height through:\
- insertion to leaf nodes
- Nodes contain between 1 and L items
- rebalancing if it reaches a limit
- 2 invariants on insertions
- The resulting tree is balanced. Runtime for operations is now O(log N)
- B-Trees handle ANY insertion order, you are guaranteed to be balanced and bushy. BSTs need a perfect insertion order to have best case height


