# Hashing
Trees w/ O(log N) search is a limit compared to O(1) get/contains\

## Simple approach
boolean array with large size\
Indexing is O(1) time, add and contains\
This is super wasteful for memory, and need other types that are not integers (support arbitrary types)

`add("dog")`
`add("cat")`

Idea: convert strings to integer representation

Problem: Eventually you run into integer overflow, and thus **collisions**. 

**Pigeonhole principle**: If there are more than x limit of integers, you will have colissions\
2 fundamental challenges:
- How do we resolve hashcode collisions
- How do we represent items in hashcode?

## Hashcode
To solve the challenge of representing objects as integers for array indexing, we can compute the **hash code** of the object.
- Java uses `.hashcode()` and computes where the `Object` sits in memory, which is unique memory address, and  computes unique hashcode for every java object

## Handling Collisions
Pigeonhole principle tells us that collisions are inevitable

What if we have keep the array idea for O(1) indexing, but also add a linked list whenever a collision occurs. So there are multiple items in 1 array memory address

## Separate Chaining
Whenever collision occurs, append the additional item into a linked list.\
So, an array of linked lists. Instead of a huge array, we can now just have a smaller array with long linked lists. This saves the memory space problem

But what about Runtime complexities?\
Worst case:
O(Q) contains() where Q is the length of the longest list\
O(Q) add() also

Not ideal, how to improve?

## Improving the hash table
Currently using separate chaining, suppose we have:
- fixed number of buckets (array spots): M
- fixed number of items: N

Even if items are spread out evenly, length Q = N/M\
How do we improve design such that N/M is O(1)?

**Resizing** solution: have a dynamically increasing hashtable size, not fixed. \
For example: when N/M is 1.5, double M

As long as M = O(N), then O(N/M) = O(1) for contains() and add()

Additionally, we can use **modulo** of the **hashcode** to get the array index. 

## Warnings:
1. Never store objects that can change in a hashset or hashmap
    - Objects that change, changes the hashcode, may result in items getting lost
2. Never override `equals` without also overriding `hashCode`
    - can lead to items getting lost
    - Hashmaps and hashsets use `equals` to determine if an item exists in a bucket

# Summary
Hashtables provide O(1) `contains()` and `add()` functions in comparison to Tree's O(log N) time. Hashtables does this by using the power of array indexing, seperate chaining to handle collisions, hashcodes to generate unique integer for objects, modulos to map hashcode to array integers, and resizing the array to ensure O(1) time.
