# Mon 01 /25 - Testing

## Introduction
Testing is important to know that code works. Following TDD principles, you should write the tests first, make them fail, then write the code to make them succeed

Red -> Green -> Refactor

Write a test method to test functionality, implement it to make it pass

Repeat for every new method

## Test sort() method:
```java
public static void testSort(){
    input = {b, a, d}
    expected = {a, b, d}

    Sort.sort(input);
    for (int i = 0; i < input.length; i++) {
        if (!input[i].equals(expected[i]) {
            "test failed"
        }
    }
}

public class Sort {
    public static void sort(String[] arr) {

    }
}
```


This is pretty tedious, so use JUnit which is built-in java testing library that makes it easy to test
```java
public static void testSort() {
    String[] input = {"i", "have", "an", "egg"};
    String[] expected = {"an", "egg", "have", "i"};
    Sort.sort(input);
    org.junit.Assert.assertArrayEquals(expected, input);
}
```


## Selection Sort:
Simplest sorting method.

O(n^2) time

Find lowest number and swap to left side, increment left ptr, continue until fully sorted


## Recursive selection sort
Since Java doesn't have array slicing, we need a helper method to pass in the index of the start for the array. 

Increment the index 
```java
public static void sort(arr) {
    sort(arr, 0) // helper method
}
/** sort helper that sorts from an index onwards */
public static void sort(arr, start) {
    findSmallest
    swap(arr, start, smallest)
    sort(arr, start+1)
}
```

## Debugging Process:
Use debugger to view the states

For cs61b specifically, can use java visualizer to visualize classes, variables, pointers, etc.

Make change to fix the bug in the code, then fix the test and make sure they pass


## Worst way to approach programming:
- Read and understand spec
- Write entire program
- Compile and fix compiler errors
- Test with autograder, get errors
- Repeat until fixed:
    - Add print statements
    - Make changes
    - Run autograder

This is slow and unsafe!

## Summary:
Testing is effective, and makes sure your code works. Use debugger to visualize what is wrong. 

Test a method, make it fail, write the code to make it pass, and repeat for every new method. Use JUnit testing library for ease (like method to compare objects instead of doing it yourself)

Write tests but only when they're useful