# Inheritance, Implements

## Inheritance
Reusing existing code by enabling subclasses or child class to inherit methods from superclass or parent class through the use of Overloading and Overriding methods. 

### Overloading
Java methods of same name but different parameters.\
Overloading works but it's more code to maintain. Imagine having to write a new method for a different param for each diff param you want\
Super repetitive, code bloat\
User interfaces instead!

### Interfaces
Create interface with all methods you want subclasses to inherit. The interface is the superclass\
Specifies what it should do, not how to do it (subclasses implement)
```java
public interface list61B<Item> {
    public void addFirst(Item x);
    public void addLast(Item y);
    public Item getFirst();
    public Item getLast();
    public Item removeLast();
    public Item get(int i);
    public void insert(Item x, int position);
    public int size();

}
```

### Overriding
Overriding is a java method overriding the original method's definition. This is relevant for inheritance and interfaces because the subclasses implement the methods themselves from the superclass

Use @Override annotation to tell java compiler that this method should be overriding another method. If say, you made a typo, the compiler will give error message saying this method isn't overriding another method

```java
@Override
public void addFirst(Item x){
    //Implementation
}
```

### Interface Inheritance
**Implements** keyword

Will this code compile and execute the method as expected? List61B is a superclass of SLList. The superclass does not have addFirst method\
Answer is it will. SLList object is created, address stored to someList variable, and SLList method is called
```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    List61B<String> someList = new SLList<String>();
    someList.addFirst("elk");
}
```

### Implementation Inheritance
**default** keyword\
Typically methods in interface provide no code and leaves it to the subclasses to implement them\
You can specifically define the implementation in the interface using **default** keyword\
This is useful if you already know what the implementation will be across all subclasses like print() statement

```java
/** Prints out entire list */
default public void print() {
    for (int i = 0; i < size(); i++) {
        System.out.println(get(i) + " " );
    }
}
```

Even though superclass provides the method implementation for print(), a subclass can still @Override it with their own implementation


### Static vs Dynamic types
```java
List61B<String> lst = new SLList<String>();
```

lst is of type "List61B" (this is the static type)\
However, objects have types too and the object that lst points to is of type "SLList" (this is the dynamic type)\
You can reassign lst to "ALList" (this is the new dynamic type), but lst is still of static type "List61B"

**Note**. dyanmic method selection only happens for overriden methods (print()) not for overloaded methods (peek(<Type>))


## Summary: Interface Inheirtance vs Implementation Inheritance
- Interface inheritance (what): Tells what the subclasses should be able to do
- Implementation Inheritence (how): Tells subclasses how they should behave

"is-a" relationship for hierarchies. Ie. Cat is an Animal, and not Cat has-a claw. 